GS3 ball
to objectively measure putting green speed, firmness, smoothness and trueness in a single device. The GS3 provides green speed measurements based on the rate of deceleration of the device. This data is translated into a green speed number in feet and inches that is comparable to a traditional Stimpmeter reading. We will not spend time in this article exploring green speed ranges because this metric is very familiar to most superintendents. However, most golf courses have never measured firmness, smoothness or trueness in an objective way. Now that the GS3 has been in use for more than a year at golf courses across the budget spectrum and at USGA championships – including the U.S. Open – we have learned a lot more about what different readings for these metrics mean.
This chart illustrates the relationship between daily smoothness and green speed over two months at one golf course based on GS3 data and visualized the DEACON management system. Notice that smoothness and speed are impacted significantly after aeration in early May – green speed drops and the smoothness number rises, which means the greens are less smooth. After a couple of weeks, the performance characteristics return to pre-aeration levels. This is a great way to explain the impact of aeration to stakeholders, and potentially to evaluate different timing and approaches to aeration that might minimize disruption.
The ranges provided below are meant to help GS3 users understand the measurements they collect. Every course should spend time developing their own benchmarks for each metric because there can be considerable variability in what constitutes desirable and undesirable readings based on turfgrass species, local weather, putting green age, soil characteristics and golfer expectations. We encourage courses to view these metrics in the context of a target range rather than a specific number, and to recognize that your target ranges will likely change throughout the year. To get the most benefits from data collection, it should be a consistent process over time. There may be opportunities to improve and learn more no matter how well your greens are performing.
The reference ranges in the sections below are all based on collecting data shortly after morning maintenance ends, but before play begins. Values for these metrics have the potential to change throughout the day depending on precipitation, grass growth, foot traffic and cultural practices. These ranges apply to all grass types, though the averages within these ranges can be expected to vary based on turf type.
Firmness:
You measure firmness with the GS3 by placing the device in a special drop fixture that allows you to drop it from a consistent height. Sensors inside the tool measure how far the drop fixture penetrates into the putting green surface in inches to provide the measurement, with lower numbers indicating firmer conditions. Multiple firmness readings should be taken across each green to develop a complete picture because individual measurements can vary significantly by location – even within the same green.
Typical Range of Values: 0.300” – 0.500”
0.300” – 0.350” Extremely Firm
0.350” – 0.400” Firm
0.400” – 0.500” Likely suitable for most facilities
&gt;0.500” Receptive
Figure 1.
